
<BASE HREF="http://classics.mit.edu/Plato/phaedrus.1b.txt"><table border=1 width=100%><tr><td><table border=1 bgcolor=#ffffff cellpadding=10 cellspacing=0 width=100% color=#ffffff><tr><td><font face=arial,sans-serif color=black size=-1>This is <b><font color=#0039b6>G</font><font color=#c41200>o</font><font color=#f3c518>o</font><font color=#0039b6>g</font><font color=#30a72f>l</font><font color=#c41200>e</font></b>'s <a href="http://www.google.com/intl/en_extra/help/features.html#cached">cache</a> of <A HREF="http://classics.mit.edu/Plato/phaedrus.1b.txt"><font color=blue>classics.mit.edu/Plato/phaedrus.1b.txt</font></a>.<br>
<b><font color=#0039b6>G</font><font color=#c41200>o</font><font color=#f3c518>o</font><font color=#0039b6>g</font><font color=#30a72f>l</font><font color=#c41200>e</font></b>'s cache is the snapshot that we took of the page as we crawled the web.<br>
The page may have changed since that time.  Click here for the <A HREF="http://classics.mit.edu/Plato/phaedrus.1b.txt"><font color=blue>current page</font></a> without highlighting.</font><br><br><center><font size=-2 color=black><i>Google is not affiliated with the authors of this page nor responsible for its content.</i></font></center></td></tr></table></td></tr></table><hr>
<html><body><pre>
Provided by The Internet Classics Archive.
See bottom for copyright. Available online at
    http://classics.mit.edu//Plato/phaedrus.html

Phaedrus
By Plato


Translated by Benjamin Jowett

Persons of the Dialogue
SOCRATES
PHAEDRUS.

Scene
Under a plane-tree, by the banks of the Ilissus.
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Socrates. My dear Phaedrus, whence come you, and whither are you going?

Phaedrus. I come from Lysias the son of Cephalus, and I am going to
take a walk outside the wall, for I have been sitting with him the
whole morning; and our common friend Acumenus tells me that it is
much more refreshing to walk in the open air than to be shut up in
a cloister. 

Soc. There he is right. Lysias then, I suppose, was in the town?

Phaedr. Yes, he was staying with Epicrates, here at the house of Morychus;
that house which is near the temple of Olympian Zeus. 

Soc. And how did he entertain you? Can I be wrong in supposing that
Lysias gave you a feast of discourse? 

Phaedr. You shall hear, if you can spare time to accompany me.

Soc. And should I not deem the conversation of you and Lysias "a thing
of higher import," as I may say in the words of Pindar, "than any
business"? 

Phaedr. Will you go on? 

Soc. And will you go on with the narration? 

Phaedr. My tale, Socrates, is one of your sort, for love was the theme
which occupied us -love after a fashion: Lysias has been writing about
a fair youth who was being tempted, but not by a lover; and this was
the point: he ingeniously proved that the non-lover should be accepted
rather than the lover. 

Soc. O that is noble of him! I wish that he would say the poor man
rather than the rich, and the old man rather than the young one; then
he would meet the case of me and of many a man; his words would be
quite refreshing, and he would be a public benefactor. For my part,
I do so long to hear his speech, that if you walk all the way to Megara,
and when you have reached the wall come back, as Herodicus recommends,
without going in, I will keep you company. 

Phaedr. What do you mean, my good Socrates? How can you imagine that
my unpractised memory can do justice to an elaborate work, which the
greatest rhetorician of the age spent a long time in composing. Indeed,
I cannot; I would give a great deal if I could. 

Soc. I believe that I know Phaedrus about as well as I know myself,
and I am very sure that the speech of Lysias was repeated to him,
not once only, but again and again;-he insisted on hearing it many
times over and Lysias was very willing to gratify him; at last, when
nothing else would do, he got hold of the book, and looked at what
he most wanted to see,-this occupied him during the whole morning;
-and then when he was tired with sitting, he went out to take a walk,
not until, by the dog, as I believe, he had simply learned by heart
the entire discourse, unless it was unusually long, and he went to
a place outside the wall that he might practise his lesson. There
he saw a certain lover of discourse who had a similar weakness;-he
saw and rejoiced; now thought he, "I shall have a partner in my revels."
And he invited him to come and walk with him. But when the lover of
discourse begged that he would repeat the tale, he gave himself airs
and said, "No I cannot," as if he were indisposed; although, if the
hearer had refused, he would sooner or later have been compelled by
him to listen whether he would or no. Therefore, Phaedrus, bid him
do at once what he will soon do whether bidden or not. 

Phaedr. I see that you will not let me off until I speak in some fashion
or other; verily therefore my best plan is to speak as I best can.

Soc. A very true remark, that of yours. 

Phaedr. I will do as I say; but believe me, Socrates, I did not learn
the very words-O no; nevertheless I have a general notion of what
he said, and will give you a summary of the points in which the lover
differed from the non-lover. Let me begin at the beginning.

Soc. Yes, my sweet one; but you must first of all show what you have
in your left hand under your cloak, for that roll, as I suspect, is
the actual discourse. Now, much as I love you, I would not have you
suppose that I am going to have your memory exercised at my expense,
if you have Lysias himself here. 

Phaedr. Enough; I see that I have no hope of practising my art upon
you. But if I am to read, where would you please to sit?

Soc. Let us turn aside and go by the Ilissus; we will sit down at
some quiet spot. 

Phaedr. I am fortunate in not having my sandals, and as you never
have any, I think that we may go along the brook and cool our feet
in the water; this will be the easiest way, and at midday and in the
summer is far from being unpleasant. 

Soc. Lead on, and look out for a place in which we can sit down.

Phaedr. Do you see the tallest plane-tree in the distance?

Soc. Yes. 

Phaedr. There are shade and gentle breezes, and grass on which we
may either sit or lie down. 

Soc. Move forward. 

Phaedr. I should like to know, Socrates, whether the place is not
somewhere here at which Boreas is said to have carried off Orithyia
from the banks of the Ilissus? 

Soc. Such is the tradition. 

Phaedr. And is this the exact spot? The little stream is delightfully
clear and bright; I can fancy that there might be maidens playing
near. 

Soc. I believe that the spot is not exactly here, but about a quarter
of a mile lower down, where you cross to the temple of Artemis, and
there is, I think, some sort of an altar of Boreas at the place.

Phaedr. I have never noticed it; but I beseech you to tell me, Socrates,
do you believe this tale? 

Soc. The wise are doubtful, and I should not be singular if, like
them, I too doubted. I might have a rational explanation that Orithyia
was playing with Pharmacia, when a northern gust carried her over
the neighbouring rocks; and this being the manner of her death, she
was said to have been carried away by Boreas. There is a discrepancy,
however, about the locality; according to another version of the story
she was taken from Areopagus, and not from this place. Now I quite
acknowledge that these allegories are very nice, but he is not to
be envied who has to invent them; much labour and ingenuity will be
required of him; and when he has once begun, he must go on and rehabilitate
Hippocentaurs and chimeras dire. Gorgons and winged steeds flow in
apace, and numberless other inconceivable and portentous natures.
And if he is sceptical about them, and would fain reduce them one
after another to the rules of probability, this sort of crude philosophy
will take up a great deal of time. Now I have no leisure for such
enquiries; shall I tell you why? I must first know myself, as the
Delphian inscription says; to be curious about that which is not my
concern, while I am still in ignorance of my own self, would be ridiculous.
And therefore I bid farewell to all this; the common opinion is enough
for me. For, as I was saying, I want to know not about this, but about
myself: am I a monster more complicated and swollen with passion than
the serpent Typho, or a creature of a gentler and simpler sort, to
whom Nature has given a diviner and lowlier destiny? But let me ask
you, friend: have we not reached the plane-tree to which you were
conducting us? 

Phaedr. Yes, this is the tree. 

Soc. By Here, a fair resting-place, full of summer sounds and scents.
Here is this lofty and spreading plane-tree, and the agnus cast us
high and clustering, in the fullest blossom and the greatest fragrance;
and the stream which flows beneath the plane-tree is deliciously cold
to the feet. Judging from the ornaments and images, this must be a
spot sacred to Achelous and the Nymphs. How delightful is the breeze:-so
very sweet; and there is a sound in the air shrill and summerlike
which makes answer to the chorus of the cicadae. But the greatest
charm of all is the grass, like a pillow gently sloping to the head.
My dear Phaedrus, you have been an admirable guide. 

Phaedr. What an incomprehensible being you are, Socrates: when you
are in the country, as you say, you really are like some stranger
who is led about by a guide. Do you ever cross the border? I rather
think that you never venture even outside the gates. 

Soc. Very true, my good friend; and I hope that you will excuse me
when you hear the reason, which is, that I am a lover of knowledge,
and the men who dwell in the city are my teachers, and not the trees
or the country. Though I do indeed believe that you have found a spell
with which to draw me out of the city into the country, like a hungry
cow before whom a bough or a bunch of fruit is waved. For only hold
up before me in like manner a book, and you may lead me all round
Attica, and over the wide world. And now having arrived, I intend
to lie down, and do you choose any posture in which you can read best.
Begin. 

Phaedr. Listen. You know how matters stand with me; and how, as I
conceive, this affair may be arranged for the advantage of both of
us. And I maintain that I ought not to fail in my suit, because I
am not your lover: for lovers repent of the kindnesses which they
have shown when their passion ceases, but to the non-lovers who are
free and not under any compulsion, no time of repentance ever comes;
for they confer their benefits according to the measure of their ability,
in the way which is most conducive to their own interest. Then again,
lovers consider how by reason of their love they have neglected their
own concerns and rendered service to others: and when to these benefits
conferred they add on the troubles which they have endured, they think
that they have long ago made to the beloved a very ample return. But
the non-lover has no such tormenting recollections; he has never neglected
his affairs or quarrelled with his relations; he has no troubles to
add up or excuse to invent; and being well rid of all these evils,
why should he not freely do what will gratify the beloved?

If you say that the lover is more to be esteemed, because his love
is thought to be greater; for he is willing to say and do what is
hateful to other men, in order to please his beloved;-that, if true,
is only a proof that he will prefer any future love to his present,
and will injure his old love at the pleasure of the new. And how,
in a matter of such infinite importance, can a man be right in trusting
himself to one who is afflicted with a malady which no experienced
person would attempt to cure, for the patient himself admits that
he is not in his right mind, and acknowledges that he is wrong in
his mind, but says that he is unable to control himself? And if he
came to his right mind, would he ever imagine that the desires were
good which he conceived when in his wrong mind? Once more, there are
many more non-lovers than lovers; and if you choose the best of the
lovers, you will not have many to choose from; but if from the non-lovers,
the choice will be larger, and you will be far more likely to find
among them a person who is worthy of your friendship. If public opinion
be your dread, and you would avoid reproach, in all probability the
lover, who is always thinking that other men are as emulous of him
as he is of them, will boast to some one of his successes, and make
a show of them openly in the pride of his heart;-he wants others to
know that his labour has not been lost; but the non-lover is more
his own master, and is desirous of solid good, and not of the opinion
of mankind. Again, the lover may be generally noted or seen following
the beloved (this is his regular occupation), and whenever they are
observed to exchange two words they are supposed to meet about some
affair of love either past or in contemplation; but when non-lovers
meet, no one asks the reason why, because people know that talking
to another is natural, whether friendship or mere pleasure be the
motive. 

Once more, if you fear the fickleness of friendship, consider that
in any other case a quarrel might be a mutual calamity; but now, when
you have given up what is most precious to you, you will be the greater
loser, and therefore, you will have more reason in being afraid of
the lover, for his vexations are many, and he is always fancying that
every one is leagued against him. Wherefore also he debars his beloved
from society; he will not have you intimate with the wealthy, lest
they should exceed him in wealth, or with men of education, lest they
should be his superiors in understanding; and he is equally afraid
of anybody's influence who has any other advantage over himself. If
he can persuade you to break with them, you are left without friend
in the world; or if, out of a regard to your own interest, you have
more sense than to comply with his desire, you will have to quarrel
with him. But those who are non-lovers, and whose success in love
is the reward of their merit, will not be jealous of the companions
of their beloved, and will rather hate those who refuse to be his
associates, thinking that their favourite is slighted by the latter
and benefited by the former; for more love than hatred may be expected
to come to him out of his friendship with others. Many lovers too
have loved the person of a youth before they knew his character or
his belongings; so that when their passion has passed away, there
is no knowing whether they will continue to be his friends; whereas,
in the case of non-lovers who were always friends, the friendship
is not lessened by the favours granted; but the recollection of these
remains with them, and is an earnest of good things to come.

Further, I say that you are likely to be improved by me, whereas the
lover will spoil you. For they praise your words and actions in a
wrong way; partly, because they are afraid of offending you, and also,
their judgment is weakened by passion. Such are the feats which love
exhibits; he makes things painful to the disappointed which give no
pain to others; he compels the successful lover to praise what ought
not to give him pleasure, and therefore the beloved is to be pitied
rather than envied. But if you listen to me, in the first place, I,
in my intercourse with you, shall not merely regard present enjoyment,
but also future advantage, being not mastered by love, but my own
master; nor for small causes taking violent dislikes, but even when
the cause is great, slowly laying up little wrath-unintentional offences
I shall forgive, and intentional ones I shall try to prevent; and
these are the marks of a friendship which will last. 

Do you think that a lover only can be a firm friend? reflect:-if this
were true, we should set small value on sons, or fathers, or mothers;
nor should we ever have loyal friends, for our love of them arises
not from passion, but from other associations. Further, if we ought
to shower favours on those who are the most eager suitors,-on that
principle, we ought always to do good, not to the most virtuous, but
to the most needy; for they are the persons who will be most relieved,
and will therefore be the most grateful; and when you make a feast
you should invite not your friend, but the beggar and the empty soul;
for they will love you, and attend you, and come about your doors,
and will be the best pleased, and the most grateful, and will invoke
many a blessing on your head. Yet surely you ought not to be granting
favours to those who besiege you with prayer, but to those who are
best able to reward you; nor to the lover only, but to those who are
worthy of love; nor to those who will enjoy the bloom of your youth,
but to those who will share their possessions with you in age; nor
to those who, having succeeded, will glory in their success to others,
but to those who will be modest and tell no tales; nor to those who
care about you for a moment only, but to those who will continue your
friends through life; nor to those who, when their passion is over,
will pick a quarrel with you, but rather to those who, when the charm
of youth has left you, will show their own virtue. Remember what I
have said; and consider yet this further point: friends admonish the
lover under the idea that his way of life is bad, but no one of his
kindred ever yet censured the non-lover, or thought that he was ill-advised
about his own interests. 

"Perhaps you will ask me whether I propose that you should indulge
every non-lover. To which I reply that not even the lover would advise
you to indulge all lovers, for the indiscriminate favour is less esteemed
by the rational recipient, and less easily hidden by him who would
escape the censure of the world. Now love ought to be for the advantage
of both parties, and for the injury of neither. 

"I believe that I have said enough; but if there is anything more
which you desire or which in your opinion needs to be supplied, ask
and I will answer." 

Now, Socrates, what do you think? Is not the discourse excellent,
more especially in the matter of the language? 

Soc. Yes, quite admirable; the effect on me was ravishing. And this
I owe to you, Phaedrus, for I observed you while reading to be in
an ecstasy, and thinking that you are more experienced in these matters
than I am, I followed your example, and, like you, my divine darling,
I became inspired with a phrenzy. 

Phaedr. Indeed, you are pleased to be merry. 

Soc. Do you mean that I am not in earnest? 

Phaedr. Now don't talk in that way, Socrates, but let me have your
real opinion; I adjure you, by Zeus, the god of friendship, to tell
me whether you think that any Hellene could have said more or spoken
better on the same subject. 

Soc. Well, but are you and I expected to praise the sentiments of
the author, or only the clearness, and roundness, and finish, and
tournure of the language? As to the first I willingly submit to your
better judgment, for I am not worthy to form an opinion, having only
attended to the rhetorical manner; and I was doubting whether this
could have been defended even by Lysias himself; I thought, though
I speak under correction, that he repeated himself two or three times,
either from want of words or from want of pains; and also, he appeared
to me ostentatiously to exult in showing how well he could say the
same thing in two or three ways. 

Phaedr. Nonsense, Socrates; what you call repetition was the especial
merit of the speech; for he omitted no topic of which the subject
rightly allowed, and I do not think that any one could have spoken
better or more exhaustively. 

Soc. There I cannot go along with you. Ancient sages, men and women,
who have spoken and written of these things, would rise up in judgment
against me, if out of complaisance I assented to you. 

Phaedr. Who are they, and where did you hear anything better than
this? 

Soc. I am sure that I must have heard; but at this moment I do not
remember from whom; perhaps from Sappho the fair, or Anacreon the
wise; or, possibly, from a prose writer. Why do I say so? Why, because
I perceive that my bosom is full, and that I could make another speech
as good as that of Lysias, and different. Now I am certain that this
is not an invention of my own, who am well aware that I know nothing,
and therefore I can only infer that I have been filled through the
cars, like a pitcher, from the waters of another, though I have actually
forgotten in my stupidity who was my informant. 

Phaedr. That is grand:-but never mind where you beard the discourse
or from whom; let that be a mystery not to be divulged even at my
earnest desire. Only, as you say, promise to make another and better
oration, equal in length and entirely new, on the same subject; and
I, like the nine Archons, will promise to set up a golden image at
Delphi, not only of myself, but of you, and as large as life.

Soc. You are a dear golden ass if you suppose me to mean that Lysias
has altogether missed the mark, and that I can make a speech from
which all his arguments are to be excluded. The worst of authors will
say something which is to the point. Who, for example, could speak
on this thesis of yours without praising the discretion of the non-lover
and blaming the indiscretion of the lover? These are the commonplaces
of the subject which must come in (for what else is there to be said?)
and must be allowed and excused; the only merit is in the arrangement
of them, for there can be none in the invention; but when you leave
the commonplaces, then there may be some originality. 

Phaedr. I admit that there is reason in what you say, and I too will
be reasonable, and will allow you to start with the premiss that the
lover is more disordered in his wits than the non-lover; if in what
remains you make a longer and better speech than Lysias, and use other
arguments, then I say again, that a statue you shall have of beaten
gold, and take your place by the colossal offerings of the Cypselids
at Olympia. 

Soc. How profoundly in earnest is the lover, because to tease him
I lay a finger upon his love! And so, Phaedrus, you really imagine
that I am going to improve upon the ingenuity of Lysias?

Phaedr. There I have you as you had me, and you must just speak "as
you best can." Do not let us exchange "tu quoque" as in a farce, or
compel me to say to you as you said to me, "I know Socrates as well
as I know myself, and he was wanting to, speak, but he gave himself
airs." Rather I would have you consider that from this place we stir
not until you have unbosomed yourself of the speech; for here are
we all alone, and I am stronger, remember, and younger than you-Wherefore
perpend, and do not compel me to use violence. 

Soc. But, my sweet Phaedrus, how ridiculous it would be of me to compete
with Lysias in an extempore speech! He is a master in his art and
I am an untaught man. 

Phaedr. You see how matters stand; and therefore let there be no more
pretences; for, indeed, I know the word that is irresistible.

Soc. Then don't say it. 

Phaedr. Yes, but I will; and my word shall be an oath. "I say, or
rather swear"-but what god will be witness of my oath?-"By this plane-tree
I swear, that unless you repeat the discourse here in the face of
this very plane-tree, I will never tell you another; never let you
have word of another!" 

Soc. Villain I am conquered; the poor lover of discourse has no more
to say. 

Phaedr. Then why are you still at your tricks? 

Soc. I am not going to play tricks now that you have taken the oath,
for I cannot allow myself to be starved. 

Phaedr. Proceed. 

Soc. Shall I tell you what I will do? 

Phaedr. What? 

Soc. I will veil my face and gallop through the discourse as fast
as I can, for if I see you I shall feel ashamed and not know what
to say. 

Phaedr. Only go on and you may do anything else which you please.

Soc. Come, O ye Muses, melodious, as ye are called, whether you have
received this name from the character of your strains, or because
the Melians are a musical race, help, O help me in the tale which
my good friend here desires me to rehearse, in order that his friend
whom he always deemed wise may seem to him to be wiser than ever.

Once upon a time there was a fair boy, or, more properly speaking,
a youth; he was very fair and had a great many lovers; and there was
one special cunning one, who had persuaded the youth that he did not
love him, but he really loved him all the same; and one day when he
was paying his addresses to him, he used this very argument-that he
ought to accept the non-lover rather than the lover; his words were
as follows:- 

"All good counsel begins in the same way; a man should know what he
is advising about, or his counsel will all come to nought. But people
imagine that they know about the nature of things, when they don't
know about them, and, not having come to an understanding at first
because they think that they know, they end, as might be expected,
in contradicting one another and themselves. Now you and I must not
be guilty of this fundamental error which we condemn in others; but
as our question is whether the lover or non-lover is to be preferred,
let us first of all agree in defining the nature and power of love,
and then, keeping our eyes upon the definition and to this appealing,
let us further enquire whether love brings advantage or disadvantage.

"Every one sees that love is a desire, and we know also that non-lovers
desire the beautiful and good. Now in what way is the lover to be
distinguished from the non-lover? Let us note that in every one of
us there are two guiding and ruling principles which lead us whither
they will; one is the natural desire of pleasure, the other is an
acquired opinion which aspires after the best; and these two are sometimes
in harmony and then again at war, and sometimes the one, sometimes
the other conquers. When opinion by the help of reason leads us to
the best, the conquering principle is called temperance; but when
desire, which is devoid of reason, rules in us and drags us to pleasure,
that power of misrule is called excess. Now excess has many names,
and many members, and many forms, and any of these forms when very
marked gives a name, neither honourable nor creditable, to the bearer
of the name. The desire of eating, for example, which gets the better
of the higher reason and the other desires, is called gluttony, and
he who is possessed by it is called a glutton-I the tyrannical desire
of drink, which inclines the possessor of the desire to drink, has
a name which is only too obvious, and there can be as little doubt
by what name any other appetite of the same family would be called;-it
will be the name of that which happens to be eluminant. And now I
think that you will perceive the drift of my discourse; but as every
spoken word is in a manner plainer than the unspoken, I had better
say further that the irrational desire which overcomes the tendency
of opinion towards right, and is led away to the enjoyment of beauty,
and especially of personal beauty, by the desires which are her own
kindred-that supreme desire, I say, which by leading conquers and
by the force of passion is reinforced, from this very force, receiving
a name, is called love." 

And now, dear Phaedrus, I shall pause for an instant to ask whether
you do not think me, as I appear to myself, inspired? 

Phaedr. Yes, Socrates, you seem to have a very unusual flow of words.

Soc. Listen to me, then, in silence; for surely the place is holy;
so that you must not wonder, if, as I proceed, I appear to be in a
divine fury, for already I am getting into dithyrambics.

Phaedr. Nothing can be truer. 

Soc. The responsibility rests with you. But hear what follows, and
Perhaps the fit may be averted; all is in their hands above. I will
go on talking to my youth. Listen: 

Thus, my friend, we have declared and defined the nature of the subject.
Keeping the definition in view, let us now enquire what advantage
or disadvantage is likely to ensue from the lover or the non-lover
to him who accepts their advances. 

He who is the victim of his passions and the slave of pleasure will
of course desire to make his beloved as agreeable to himself as possible.
Now to him who has a mind discased anything is agreeable which is
not opposed to him, but that which is equal or superior is hateful
to him, and therefore the lover Will not brook any superiority or
equality on the part of his beloved; he is always employed in reducing
him to inferiority. And the ignorant is the inferior of the wise,
the coward of the brave, the slow of speech of the speaker, the dull
of the clever. These, and not these only, are the mental defects of
the beloved;-defects which, when implanted by nature, are necessarily
a delight to the lover, and when not implanted, he must contrive to
implant them in him, if he would not be deprived of his fleeting joy.
And therefore he cannot help being jealous, and will debar his beloved
from the advantages of society which would make a man of him, and
especially from that society which would have given him wisdom, and
thereby he cannot fail to do him great harm. That is to say, in his
excessive fear lest he should come to be despised in his eyes he will
be compelled to banish from him divine philosophy; and there is no
greater injury which he can inflict upon him than this. He will contrive
that his beloved shall be wholly ignorant, and in everything shall
look to him; he is to be the delight of the lover's heart, and a curse
to himself. Verily, a lover is a profitable guardian and associate
for him in all that relates to his mind. 

Let us next see how his master, whose law of life is pleasure and
not good, will keep and train the body of his servant. Will he not
choose a beloved who is delicate rather than sturdy and strong? One
brought up in shady bowers and not in the bright sun, a stranger to
manly exercises and the sweat of toil, accustomed only to a soft and
luxurious diet, instead of the hues of health having the colours of
paint and ornament, and the rest of a piece?-such a life as any one
can imagine and which I need not detail at length. But I may sum up
all that I have to say in a word, and pass on. Such a person in war,
or in any of the great crises of life, will be the anxiety of his
friends and also of his lover, and certainly not the terror of his
enemies; which nobody can deny. 

And now let us tell what advantage or disadvantage the beloved will
receive from the guardianship and society of his lover in the matter
of his property; this is the next point to be considered. The lover
will be the first to see what, indeed, will be sufficiently evident
to all men, that he desires above all things to deprive his beloved
of his dearest and best and holiest possessions, father, mother, kindred,
friends, of all whom he thinks may be hinderers or reprovers of their
most sweet converse; he will even cast a jealous eye upon his gold
and silver or other property, because these make him a less easy prey,
and when caught less manageable; hence he is of necessity displeased
at his possession of them and rejoices at their loss; and he would
like him to be wifeless, childless, homeless, as well; and the longer
the better, for the longer he is all this, the longer he will enjoy
him. 

There are some soft of animals, such as flatterers, who are dangerous
and, mischievous enough, and yet nature has mingled a temporary pleasure
and grace in their composition. You may say that a courtesan is hurtful,
and disapprove of such creatures and their practices, and yet for
the time they are very pleasant. But the lover is not only hurtful
to his love; he is also an extremely disagreeable companion. The old
proverb says that "birds of a feather flock together"; I suppose that
equality of years inclines them to the same pleasures, and similarity
begets friendship; yet you may have more than enough even of this;
and verily constraint is always said to be grievous. Now the lover
is not only unlike his beloved, but he forces himself upon him. For
he is old and his love is young, and neither day nor night will he
leave him if he can help; necessity and the sting of desire drive
him on, and allure him with the pleasure which he receives from seeing,
hearing, touching, perceiving him in every way. And therefore he is
delighted to fasten upon him and to minister to him. But what pleasure
or consolation can the beloved be receiving all this time? Must he
not feel the extremity of disgust when he looks at an old shrivelled
face and the remainder to match, which even in a description is disagreeable,
and quite detestable when he is forced into daily contact with his
lover; moreover he is jealously watched and guarded against everything
and everybody, and has to hear misplaced and exaggerated praises of
himself, and censures equally inappropriate, which are intolerable
when the man is sober, and, besides being intolerable, are published
all over the world in all their indelicacy and wearisomeness when
he is drunk. 

And not only while his love continues is he mischievous and unpleasant,
but when his love ceases he becomes a perfidious enemy of him on whom
he showered his oaths and prayers and promises, and yet could hardly
prevail upon him to tolerate the tedium of his company even from motives
of interest. The hour of payment arrives, and now he is the servant
of another master; instead of love and infatuation, wisdom and temperance
are his bosom's lords; but the beloved has not discovered the change
which has taken place in him, when he asks for a return and recalls
to his recollection former sayings and doings; he believes himself
to be speaking to the same person, and the other, not having the courage
to confess the truth, and not knowing how to fulfil the oaths and
promises which he made when under the dominion of folly, and having
now grown wise and temperate, does not want to do as he did or to
be as he was before. And so he runs away and is constrained to be
a defaulter; the oyster-shell has fallen with the other side uppermost-he
changes pursuit into flight, while the other is compelled to follow
him with passion and imprecation not knowing that he ought never from
the first to have accepted a demented lover instead of a sensible
non-lover; and that in making such a choice he was giving himself
up to a faithless, morose, envious, disagreeable being, hurtful to
his estate, hurtful to his bodily health, and still more hurtful to
the cultivation of his mind, than which there neither is nor ever
will be anything more honoured in the eyes both of gods and men. Consider
this, fair youth, and know that in the friendship of the lover there
is no real kindness; he has an appetite and wants to feed upon you:

As wolves love lambs so lovers love their loves. 

But I told you so, I am speaking in verse, and therefore I had better
make an end; enough. 

Phaedr. I thought that you were only halfway and were going to make
a similar speech about all the advantages of accepting the non-lover.
Why do you not proceed? 

Soc. Does not your simplicity observe that I have got out of dithyrambics
into heroics, when only uttering a censure on the lover? And if I
am to add the praises of the non-lover, what will become of me? Do
you not perceive that I am already overtaken by the Nymphs to whom
you have mischievously exposed me? And therefore will only add that
the non-lover has all the advantages in which the lover is accused
of being deficient. And now I will say no more; there has been enough
of both of them. Leaving the tale to its fate, I will cross the river
and make the best of my way home, lest a worse thing be inflicted
upon me by you. 

Phaedr. Not yet, Socrates; not until the heat of the day has passed;
do you not see that the hour is almost noon? there is the midday sun
standing still, as people say, in the meridian. Let us rather stay
and talk over what has been said, and then return in the cool.

Soc. Your love of discourse, Phaedrus, is superhuman, simply marvellous,
and I do not believe that there is any one of your contemporaries
who has either made or in one way or another has compelled others
to make an equal number of speeches. I would except Simmias the Theban,
but all the rest are far behind you. And now, I do verily believe
that you have been the cause of another. 

Phaedr. That is good news. But what do you mean? 

Soc. I mean to say that as I was about to cross the stream the usual
sign was given to me,-that sign which always forbids, but never bids,
me to do anything which I am going to do; and I thought that I heard
a voice saying in my car that I had been guilty of impiety, and. that
I must not go away until I had made an atonement. Now I am a diviner,
though not a very good one, but I have enough religion for my own
use, as you might say of a bad writer-his writing is good enough for
him; and I am beginning to see that I was in error. O my friend, how
prophetic is the human soul! At the time I had a sort of misgiving,
and, like Ibycus, "I was troubled; I feared that I might be buying
honour from men at the price of sinning against the gods." Now I recognize
my error. 

Phaedr. What error? 

Soc. That was a dreadful speech which you brought with you, and you
made me utter one as bad. 

Phaedr. How so? 

Soc. It was foolish, I say,-to a certain extent, impious; can anything
be more dreadful? 

Phaedr. Nothing, if the speech was really such as you describe.

Soc. Well, and is not Eros the son of Aphrodite, and a god?

Phaedr. So men say. 

Soc. But that was not acknowledged by Lysias in his speech, nor by
you in that other speech which you by a charm drew from my lips. For
if love be, as he surely is, a divinity, he cannot be evil. Yet this
was the error of both the speeches. There was also a simplicity about
them which was refreshing; having no truth or honesty in them, nevertheless
they pretended to be something, hoping to succeed in deceiving the
manikins of earth and gain celebrity among them. Wherefore I must
have a purgation. And I bethink me of an ancient purgation of mythological
error which was devised, not by Homer, for he never had the wit to
discover why he was blind, but by Stesichorus, who was a philosopher
and knew the reason why; and therefore, when he lost his eyes, for
that was the penalty which was inflicted upon him for reviling the
lovely Helen, he at once purged himself. And the purgation was a recantation,
which began thus,- 

False is that word of mine-the truth is that thou didst not embark
in ships, nor ever go to the walls of Troy; and when he had completed
his poem, which is called "the recantation," immediately his sight
returned to him. Now I will be wiser than either Stesichorus or Homer,
in that I am going to make my recantation for reviling love before
I suffer; and this I will attempt, not as before, veiled and ashamed,
but with forehead bold and bare. 

Phaedr. Nothing could be more agreeable to me than to hear you say
so. 

Soc. Only think, my good Phaedrus, what an utter want of delicacy
was shown in the two discourses; I mean, in my own and in that which
you recited out of the book. Would not any one who was himself of
a noble and gentle nature, and who loved or ever had loved a nature
like his own, when we tell of the petty causes of lovers' jealousies,
and of their exceeding animosities, and of the injuries which they
do to their beloved, have imagined that our ideas of love were taken
from some haunt of sailors to which good manners were unknown-he would
certainly never have admitted the justice of our censure?

Phaedr. I dare say not, Socrates. 

Soc. Therefore, because I blush at the thought of this person, and
also because I am afraid of Love himself, I desire to wash the brine
out of my ears with water from the spring; and I would counsel Lysias
not to delay, but to write another discourse, which shall prove that
ceteris paribus the lover ought to be accepted rather than the non-lover.

Phaedr. Be assured that he shall. You shall speak the praises of the
lover, and Lysias shall be compelled by me to write another discourse
on the same theme. 

Soc. You will be true to your nature in that, and therefore I believe
you. 

Phaedr. Speak, and fear not. 

Soc. But where is the fair youth whom I was addressing before, and
who ought to listen now; lest, if he hear me not, he should accept
a non-lover before he knows what he is doing? 

Phaedr. He is close at hand, and always at your service.

Soc. Know then, fair youth, that the former discourse was the word
of Phaedrus, the son of Vain Man, who dwells in the city of Myrrhina
(Myrrhinusius). And this which I am about to utter is the recantation
of Stesichorus the son of Godly Man (Euphemus), who comes from the
town of Desire (Himera), and is to the following effect: "I told a
lie when I said" that the beloved ought to accept the non-lover when
he might have the lover, because the one is sane, and the other mad.
It might be so if madness were simply an evil; but there is also a
madness which is a divine gift, and the source of the chiefest blessings
granted to men. For prophecy is a madness, and the prophetess at Delphi
and the priestesses at Dodona when out of their senses have conferred
great benefits on Hellas, both in public and private life, but when
in their senses few or none. And I might also tell you how the Sibyl
and other inspired persons have given to many an one many an intimation
of the future which has saved them from falling. But it would be tedious
to speak of what every one knows. 

There will be more reason in appealing to the ancient inventors of
names, who would never have connected prophecy (mantike) which foretells
the future and is the noblest of arts, with madness (manike), or called
them both by the same name, if they had deemed madness to be a disgrace
or dishonour;-they must have thought that there was an inspired madness
which was a noble thing; for the two words, mantike and manike, are
really the same, and the letter t is only a modern and tasteless insertion.
And this is confirmed by the name which was given by them to the rational
investigation of futurity, whether made by the help of birds or of
other signs-this, for as much as it is an art which supplies from
the reasoning faculty mind (nous) and information (istoria) to human
thought (oiesis) they originally termed oionoistike, but the word
has been lately altered and made sonorous by the modern introduction
of the letter Omega (oionoistike and oionistike), and in proportion
prophecy (mantike) is more perfect and august than augury, both in
name and fact, in the same proportion, as the ancients testify, is
madness superior to a sane mind (sophrosune) for the one is only of
human, but the other of divine origin. Again, where plagues and mightiest
woes have bred in certain families, owing to some ancient blood-guiltiness,
there madness has entered with holy prayers and rites, and by inspired
utterances found a way of deliverance for those who are in need; and
he who has part in this gift, and is truly possessed and duly out
of his mind, is by the use of purifications and mysteries made whole
and except from evil, future as well as present, and has a release
from the calamity which was afflicting him. The third kind is the
madness of those who are possessed by the Muses; which taking hold
of a delicate and virgin soul, and there inspiring frenzy, awakens
lyrical and all other numbers; with these adorning the myriad actions
of ancient heroes for the instruction of posterity. But he who, having
no touch of the Muses' madness in his soul, comes to the door and
thinks that he will get into the temple by the help of art-he, I say,
and his poetry are not admitted; the sane man disappears and is nowhere
when he enters into rivalry with the madman. 

I might tell of many other noble deeds which have sprung from inspired
madness. And therefore, let no one frighten or flutter us by saying
that the temperate friend is to be chosen rather than the inspired,
but let him further show that love is not sent by the gods for any
good to lover or beloved; if he can do so we will allow him to carry
off the palm. And we, on our part, will prove in answer to him that
the madness of love is the greatest of heaven's blessings, and the
proof shall be one which the wise will receive, and the witling disbelieve.
But first of all, let us view the affections and actions of the soul
divine and human, and try to ascertain the truth about them. The beginning
of our proof is as follows:- 

The soul through all her being is immortal, for that which is ever
in motion is immortal; but that which moves another and is moved by
another, in ceasing to move ceases also to live. Only the self-moving,
never leaving self, never ceases to move, and is the fountain and
beginning of motion to all that moves besides. Now, the beginning
is unbegotten, for that which is begotten has a beginning; but the
beginning is begotten of nothing, for if it were begotten of something,
then the begotten would not come from a beginning. But if unbegotten,
it must also be indestructible; for if beginning were destroyed, there
could be no beginning out of anything, nor anything out of a beginning;
and all things must have a beginning. And therefore the self-moving
is the beginning of motion; and this can neither be destroyed nor
begotten, else the whole heavens and all creation would collapse and
stand still, and never again have motion or birth. But if the self-moving
is proved to be immortal, he who affirms that self-motion is the very
idea and essence of the soul will not be put to confusion. For the
body which is moved from without is soulless; but that which is moved
from within has a soul, for such is the nature of the soul. But if
this be true, must not the soul be the self-moving, and therefore
of necessity unbegotten and immortal? Enough of the soul's immortality.

Of the nature of the soul, though her true form be ever a theme of
large and more than mortal discourse, let me speak briefly, and in
a figure. And let the figure be composite-a pair of winged horses
and a charioteer. Now the winged horses and the charioteers of the
gods are all of them noble and of noble descent, but those of other
races are mixed; the human charioteer drives his in a pair; and one
of them is noble and of noble breed, and the other is ignoble and
of ignoble breed; and the driving of them of necessity gives a great
deal of trouble to him. I will endeavour to explain to you in what
way the mortal differs from the immortal creature. The soul in her
totality has the care of inanimate being everywhere, and traverses
the whole heaven in divers forms appearing--when perfect and fully
winged she soars upward, and orders the whole world; whereas the imperfect
soul, losing her wings and drooping in her flight at last settles
on the solid ground-there, finding a home, she receives an earthly
frame which appears to be self-moved, but is really moved by her power;
and this composition of soul and body is called a living and mortal
creature. For immortal no such union can be reasonably believed to
be; although fancy, not having seen nor surely known the nature of
God, may imagine an immortal creature having both a body and also
a soul which are united throughout all time. Let that, however, be
as God wills, and be spoken of acceptably to him. And now let us ask
the reason why the soul loses her wings! 

The wing is the corporeal element which is most akin to the divine,
and which by nature tends to soar aloft and carry that which gravitates
downwards into the upper region, which is the habitation of the gods.
The divine is beauty, wisdom, goodness, and the like; and by these
the wing of the soul is nourished, and grows apace; but when fed upon
evil and foulness and the opposite of good, wastes and falls away.
Zeus, the mighty lord, holding the reins of a winged chariot, leads
the way in heaven, ordering all and taking care of all; and there
follows him the array of gods and demigods, marshalled in eleven bands;
Hestia alone abides at home in the house of heaven; of the rest they
who are reckoned among the princely twelve march in their appointed
order. They see many blessed sights in the inner heaven, and there
are many ways to and fro, along which the blessed gods are passing,
every one doing his own work; he may follow who will and can, for
jealousy has no place in the celestial choir. But when they go to
banquet and festival, then they move up the steep to the top of the
vault of heaven. The chariots of the gods in even poise, obeying the
rein, glide rapidly; but the others labour, for the vicious steed
goes heavily, weighing down the charioteer to the earth when his steed
has not been thoroughly trained:-and this is the hour of agony and
extremest conflict for the soul. For the immortals, when they are
at the end of their course, go forth and stand upon the outside of
heaven, and the revolution of the spheres carries them round, and
they behold the things beyond. But of the heaven which is above the
heavens, what earthly poet ever did or ever will sing worthily? It
is such as I will describe; for I must dare to speak the truth, when
truth is my theme. There abides the very being with which true knowledge
is concerned; the colourless, formless, intangible essence, visible
only to mind, the pilot of the soul. The divine intelligence, being
nurtured upon mind and pure knowledge, and the intelligence of every
soul which is capable of receiving the food proper to it, rejoices
at beholding reality, and once more gazing upon truth, is replenished
and made glad, until the revolution of the worlds brings her round
again to the same place. In the revolution she beholds justice, and
temperance, and knowledge absolute, not in the form of generation
or of relation, which men call existence, but knowledge absolute in
existence absolute; and beholding the other true existences in like
manner, and feasting upon them, she passes down into the interior
of the heavens and returns home; and there the charioteer putting
up his horses at the stall, gives them ambrosia to eat and nectar
to drink. 

Such is the life of the gods; but of other souls, that which follows
God best and is likest to him lifts the head of the charioteer into
the outer world, and is carried round in the revolution, troubled
indeed by the steeds, and with difficulty beholding true being; while
another only rises and falls, and sees, and again fails to see by
reason of the unruliness of the steeds. The rest of the souls are
also longing after the upper world and they all follow, but not being
strong enough they are carried round below the surface, plunging,
treading on one another, each striving to be first; and there is confusion
and perspiration and the extremity of effort; and many of them are
lamed or have their wings broken through the ill-driving of the charioteers;
and all of them after a fruitless toil, not having attained to the
mysteries of true being, go away, and feed upon opinion. The reason
why the souls exhibit this exceeding eagerness to behold the plain
of truth is that pasturage is found there, which is suited to the
highest part of the soul; and the wing on which the soul soars is
nourished with this. And there is a law of Destiny, that the soul
which attains any vision of truth in company with a god is preserved
from harm until the next period, and if attaining always is always
unharmed. But when she is unable to follow, and fails to behold the
truth, and through some ill-hap sinks beneath the double load of forgetfulness
and vice, and her wings fall from her and she drops to the ground,
then the law ordains that this soul shall at her first birth pass,
not into any other animal, but only into man; and the soul which has
seen most of truth shall come to the birth as a philosopher, or artist,
or some musical and loving nature; that which has seen truth in the
second degree shall be some righteous king or warrior chief; the soul
which is of the third class shall be a politician, or economist, or
trader; the fourth shall be lover of gymnastic toils, or a physician;
the fifth shall lead the life of a prophet or hierophant; to the sixth
the character of poet or some other imitative artist will be assigned;
to the seventh the life of an artisan or husbandman; to the eighth
that of a sophist or demagogue; to the ninth that of a tyrant-all
these are states of probation, in which he who does righteously improves,
and he who does unrighteously, improves, and he who does unrighteously,
deteriorates his lot. 

Ten thousand years must elapse before the soul of each one can return
to the place from whence she came, for she cannot grow her wings in
less; only the soul of a philosopher, guileless and true, or the soul
of a lover, who is not devoid of philosophy, may acquire wings in
the third of the recurring periods of a thousand years; he is distinguished
from the ordinary good man who gains wings in three thousand years:-and
they who choose this life three times in succession have wings given
them, and go away at the end of three thousand years. But the others
receive judgment when they have completed their first life, and after
the judgment they go, some of them to the houses of correction which
are under the earth, and are punished; others to some place in heaven
whither they are lightly borne by justice, and there they live in
a manner worthy of the life which they led here when in the form of
men. And at the end of the first thousand years the good souls and
also the evil souls both come to draw lots and choose their second
life, and they may take any which they please. The soul of a man may
pass into the life of a beast, or from the beast return again into
the man. But the soul which has never seen the truth will not pass
into the human form. For a man must have intelligence of universals,
and be able to proceed from the many particulars of sense to one conception
of reason;-this is the recollection of those things which our soul
once saw while following God-when regardless of that which we now
call being she raised her head up towards the true being. And therefore
the mind of the philosopher alone has wings; and this is just, for
he is always, according to the measure of his abilities, clinging
in recollection to those things in which God abides, and in beholding
which He is what He is. And he who employs aright these memories is
ever being initiated into perfect mysteries and alone becomes truly
perfect. But, as he forgets earthly interests and is rapt in the divine,
the vulgar deem him mad, and rebuke him; they do not see that he is
inspired. 

Thus far I have been speaking of the fourth and last kind of madness,
which is imputed to him who, when he sees the beauty of earth, is
transported with the recollection of the true beauty; he would like
to fly away, but he cannot; he is like a bird fluttering and looking
upward and careless of the world below; and he is therefore thought
to be mad. And I have shown this of all inspirations to be the noblest
and highest and the offspring of the highest to him who has or shares
in it, and that he who loves the beautiful is called a lover because
he partakes of it. For, as has been already said, every soul of man
has in the way of nature beheld true being; this was the condition
of her passing into the form of man. But all souls do not easily recall
the things of the other world; they may have seen them for a short
time only, or they may have been unfortunate in their earthly lot,
and, having had their hearts turned to unrighteousness through some
corrupting influence, they may have lost the memory of the holy things
which once they saw. Few only retain an adequate remembrance of them;
and they, when they behold here any image of that other world, are
rapt in amazement; but they are ignorant of what this rapture means,
because they do not clearly perceive. For there is no light of justice
or temperance or any of the higher ideas which are precious to souls
in the earthly copies of them: they are seen through a glass dimly;
and there are few who, going to the images, behold in them the realities,
and these only with difficulty. There was a time when with the rest
of the happy band they saw beauty shining in brightness-we philosophers
following in the train of Zeus, others in company with other gods;
and then we beheld the beatific vision and were initiated into a mystery
which may be truly called most blessed, celebrated by us in our state
of innocence, before we had any experience of evils to come, when
we were admitted to the sight of apparitions innocent and simple and
calm and happy, which we beheld shining impure light, pure ourselves
and not yet enshrined in that living tomb which we carry about, now
that we are imprisoned in the body, like an oyster in his shell. Let
me linger over the memory of scenes which have passed away.

But of beauty, I repeat again that we saw her there shining in company
with the celestial forms; and coming to earth we find her here too,
shining in clearness through the clearest aperture of sense. For sight
is the most piercing of our bodily senses; though not by that is wisdom
seen; her loveliness would have been transporting if there had been
a visible image of her, and the other ideas, if they had visible counterparts,
would be equally lovely. But this is the privilege of beauty, that
being the loveliest she is also the most palpable to sight. Now he
who is not newly initiated or who has become corrupted, does not easily
rise out of this world to the sight of true beauty in the other; he
looks only at her earthly namesake, and instead of being awed at the
sight of her, he is given over to pleasure, and like a brutish beast
he rushes on to enjoy and beget; he consorts with wantonness, and
is not afraid or ashamed of pursuing pleasure in violation of nature.
But he whose initiation is recent, and who has been the spectator
of many glories in the other world, is amazed when he sees any one
having a godlike face or form, which is the expression of divine beauty;
and at first a shudder runs through him, and again the old awe steals
over him; then looking upon the face of his beloved as of a god he
reverences him, and if he were not afraid of being thought a downright
madman, he would sacrifice to his beloved as to the image of a god;
then while he gazes on him there is a sort of reaction, and the shudder
passes into an unusual heat and perspiration; for, as he receives
the effluence of beauty through the eyes, the wing moistens and he
warms. And as he warms, the parts out of which the wing grew, and
which had been hitherto closed and rigid, and had prevented the wing
from shooting forth, are melted, and as nourishment streams upon him,
the lower end of the wings begins to swell and grow from the root
upwards; and the growth extends under the whole soul-for once the
whole was winged. 

During this process the whole soul is all in a state of ebullition
and effervescence,-which may be compared to the irritation and uneasiness
in the gums at the time of cutting teeth,-bubbles up, and has a feeling
of uneasiness and tickling; but when in like manner the soul is beginning
to grow wings, the beauty of the beloved meets her eye and she receives
the sensible warm motion of particles which flow towards her, therefore
called emotion (imeros), and is refreshed and warmed by them, and
then she ceases from her pain with joy. But when she is parted from
her beloved and her moisture fails, then the orifices of the passage
out of which the wing shoots dry up and close, and intercept the germ
of the wing; which, being shut up with the emotion, throbbing as with
the pulsations of an artery, pricks the aperture which is nearest,
until at length the entire soul is pierced and maddened and pained,
and at the recollection of beauty is again delighted. And from both
of them together the soul is oppressed at the strangeness of her condition,
and is in a great strait and excitement, and in her madness can neither
sleep by night nor abide in her place by day. And wherever she thinks
that she will behold the beautiful one, thither in her desire she
runs. And when she has seen him, and bathed herself in the waters
of beauty, her constraint is loosened, and she is refreshed, and has
no more pangs and pains; and this is the sweetest of all pleasures
at the time, and is the reason why the soul of the lover will never
forsake his beautiful one, whom he esteems above all; he has forgotten
mother and brethren and companions, and he thinks nothing of the neglect
and loss of his property; the rules and proprieties of life, on which
he formerly prided himself, he now despises, and is ready to sleep
like a servant, wherever he is allowed, as near as he can to his desired
one, who is the object of his worship, and the physician who can alone
assuage the greatness of his pain. And this state, my dear imaginary
youth to whom I am talking, is by men called love, and among the gods
has a name at which you, in your simplicity, may be inclined to mock;
there are two lines in the apocryphal writings of Homer in which the
name occurs. One of them is rather outrageous, and not altogether
metrical. They are as follows: 

Mortals call him fluttering love, 
But the immortals call him winged one, 
Because the growing of wings is a necessity to him. You may believe
this, but not unless you like. At any rate the loves of lovers and
their causes are such as I have described. 

Now the lover who is taken to be the attendant of Zeus is better able
to bear the winged god, and can endure a heavier burden; but the attendants
and companions of Ares, when under the influence of love, if they
fancy that they have been at all wronged, are ready to kill and put
an end to themselves and their beloved. And he who follows in the
train of any other god, while he is unspoiled and the impression lasts,
honours and imitates him, as far as he is able; and after the manner
of his god he behaves in his intercourse with his beloved and with
the rest of the world during the first period of his earthly existence.
Every one chooses his love from the ranks of beauty according to his
character, and this he makes his god, and fashions and adorns as a
sort of image which he is to fall down and worship. The followers
of Zeus desire that their beloved should have a soul like him; and
therefore they seek out some one of a philosophical and imperial nature,
and when they have found him and loved him, they do all they can to
confirm such a nature in him, and if they have no experience of such
a disposition hitherto, they learn of any one who can teach them,
and themselves follow in the same way. And they have the less difficulty
in finding the nature of their own god in themselves, because they
have been compelled to gaze intensely on him; their recollection clings
to him, and they become possessed of him, and receive from him their
character and disposition, so far as man can participate in God. The
qualities of their god they attribute to the beloved, wherefore they
love him all the more, and if, like the Bacchic Nymphs, they draw
inspiration from Zeus, they pour out their own fountain upon him,
wanting to make him as like as possible to their own god. But those
who are the followers of Here seek a royal love, and when they have
found him they do just the same with him; and in like manner the followers
of Apollo, and of every other god walking in the ways of their god,
seek a love who is to be made like him whom they serve, and when they
have found him, they themselves imitate their god, and persuade their
love to do the same, and educate him into the manner and nature of
the god as far as they each can; for no feelings of envy or jealousy
are entertained by them towards their beloved, but they do their utmost
to create in him the greatest likeness of themselves and of the god
whom they honour. Thus fair and blissful to the beloved is the desire
of the inspired lover, and the initiation of which I speak into the
mysteries of true love, if he be captured by the lover and their purpose
is effected. Now the beloved is taken captive in the following manner:-

As I said at the beginning of this tale, I divided each soul into
three-two horses and a charioteer; and one of the horses was good
and the other bad: the division may remain, but I have not yet explained
in what the goodness or badness of either consists, and to that I
will proceed. The right-hand horse is upright and cleanly made; he
has a lofty neck and an aquiline nose; his colour is white, and his
eyes dark; he is a lover of honour and modesty and temperance, and
the follower of true glory; he needs no touch of the whip, but is
guided by word and admonition only. The other is a crooked lumbering
animal, put together anyhow; he has a short thick neck; he is flat-faced
and of a dark colour, with grey eyes and blood-red complexion; the
mate of insolence and pride, shag-eared and deaf, hardly yielding
to whip and spur. Now when the charioteer beholds the vision of love,
and has his whole soul warmed through sense, and is full of the prickings
and ticklings of desire, the obedient steed, then as always under
the government of shame, refrains from leaping on the beloved; but
the other, heedless of the pricks and of the blows of the whip, plunges
and runs away, giving all manner of trouble to his companion and the
charioteer, whom he forces to approach the beloved and to remember
the joys of love. They at first indignantly oppose him and will not
be urged on to do terrible and unlawful deeds; but at last, when he
persists in plaguing them, they yield and agree to do as he bids them.

And now they are at the spot and behold the flashing beauty of the
beloved; which when the charioteer sees, his memory is carried to
the true beauty, whom he beholds in company with Modesty like an image
placed upon a holy pedestal. He sees her, but he is afraid and falls
backwards in adoration, and by his fall is compelled to pull back
the reins with such violence as to bring both the steeds on their
haunches, the one willing and unresisting, the unruly one very unwilling;
and when they have gone back a little, the one is overcome with shame
and wonder, and his whole soul is bathed in perspiration; the other,
when the pain is over which the bridle and the fall had given him,
having with difficulty taken breath, is full of wrath and reproaches,
which he heaps upon the charioteer and his fellow-steed, for want
of courage and manhood, declaring that they have been false to their
agreement and guilty of desertion. Again they refuse, and again he
urges them on, and will scarce yield to their prayer that he would
wait until another time. When the appointed hour comes, they make
as if they had forgotten, and he reminds them, fighting and neighing
and dragging them on, until at length he, on the same thoughts intent,
forces them to draw near again. And when they are near he stoops his
head and puts up his tail, and takes the bit in his teeth. and pulls
shamelessly. Then the charioteer is. worse off than ever; he falls
back like a racer at the barrier, and with a still more violent wrench
drags the bit out of the teeth of the wild steed and covers his abusive
tongue and-jaws with blood, and forces his legs and haunches to the
ground and punishes him sorely. And when this has happened several
times and the villain has ceased from his wanton way, he is tamed
and humbled, and follows the will of the charioteer, and when he sees
the beautiful one he is ready to die of fear. And from that time forward
the soul of the lover follows the beloved in modesty and holy fear.

And so the beloved who, like a god, has received every true and loyal
service from his lover, not in pretence but in reality, being also
himself of a nature friendly to his admirer, if in former days he
has blushed to own his passion and turned away his lover, because
his youthful companions or others slanderously told him that he would
be disgraced, now as years advance, at the appointed age and time,
is led to receive him into communion. For fate which has ordained
that there shall be no friendship among the evil has also ordained
that there shall ever be friendship among the good. And the beloved
when he has received him into communion and intimacy, is quite amazed
at the good-will of the lover; he recognises that the inspired friend
is worth all other friends or kinsmen; they have nothing of friendship
in them worthy to be compared with his. And when his feeling continues
and he is nearer to him and embraces him, in gymnastic exercises and
at other times of meeting, then the fountain of that stream, which
Zeus when he was in love with Ganymede named Desire, overflows upon
the lover, and some enters into his soul, and some when he is filled
flows out again; and as a breeze or an echo rebounds from the smooth
rocks and returns whence it came, so does the stream of beauty, passing
through the eyes which are the windows of the soul, come back to the
beautiful one; there arriving and quickening the passages of the wings,
watering. them and inclining them to grow, and filling the soul of
the beloved also with love. And thus he loves, but he knows not what;
he does not understand and cannot explain his own state; he appears
to have caught the infection of blindness from another; the lover
is his mirror in whom he is beholding himself, but he is not aware
of this. When he is with the lover, both cease from their pain, but
when he is away then he longs as he is longed for, and has love's
image, love for love (Anteros) lodging in his breast, which he calls
and believes to be not love but friendship only, and his desire is
as the desire of the other, but weaker; he wants to see him, touch
him, kiss him, embrace him, and probably not long afterwards his desire
is accomplished. When they meet, the wanton steed of the lover has
a word to say to the charioteer; he would like to have a little pleasure
in return for many pains, but the wanton steed of the beloved says
not a word, for he is bursting with passion which he understands not;-he
throws his arms round the lover and embraces him as his dearest friend;
and, when they are side by side, he is not in it state in which he
can refuse the lover anything, if he ask him; although his fellow-steed
and the charioteer oppose him with the arguments of shame and reason.

After this their happiness depends upon their self-control; if the
better elements of the mind which lead to order and philosophy prevail,
then they pass their life here in happiness and harmony-masters of
themselves and orderly-enslaving the vicious and emancipating the
virtuous elements of the soul; and when the end comes, they are light
and winged for flight, having conquered in one of the three heavenly
or truly Olympian victories; nor can human discipline or divine inspiration
confer any greater blessing on man than this. If, on the other hand,
they leave philosophy and lead the lower life of ambition, then probably,
after wine or in some other careless hour, the two wanton animals
take the two souls when off their guard and bring them together, and
they accomplish that desire of their hearts which to the many is bliss;
and this having once enjoyed they continue to enjoy, yet rarely because
they have not the approval of the whole soul. They too are dear, but
not so dear to one another as the others, either at the time of their
love or afterwards. They consider that they have given and taken from
each other the most sacred pledges, and they may not break them and
fall into enmity. At last they pass out of the body, unwinged, but
eager to soar, and thus obtain no mean reward of love and madness.
For those who have once begun the heavenward pilgrimage may not go
down again to darkness and the journey beneath the earth, but they
live in light always; happy companions in their pilgrimage, and when
the time comes at which they receive their wings they have the same
plumage because of their love. 

Thus great are the heavenly blessings which the friendship of a lover
will confer upon you, my youth. Whereas the attachment of the non-lover,
which is alloyed with a worldly prudence and has worldly and niggardly
ways of doling out benefits, will breed in your soul those vulgar
qualities which the populace applaud, will send you bowling round
the earth during a period of nine thousand years, and leave, you a
fool in the world below. 

And thus, dear Eros, I have made and paid my recantation, as well
and as fairly as I could; more especially in the matter of the poetical
figures which I was compelled to use, because Phaedrus would have
them. And now forgive the past and accept the present, and be gracious
and merciful to me, and do not in thine anger deprive me of sight,
or take from me the art of love which thou hast given me, but grant
that I may be yet more esteemed in the eyes of the fair. And if Phaedrus
or I myself said anything rude in our first speeches, blame Lysias,
who is the father of the brat, and let us have no more of his progeny;
bid him study philosophy, like his brother Polemarchus; and then his
lover Phaedrus will no longer halt between two opinions, but will
dedicate himself wholly to love and to philosophical discourses.

Phaedr. I join in the prayer, Socrates, and say with you, if this
be for my good, may your words come to pass. But why did you make
your second oration so much finer than the first? I wonder why. And
I begin to be afraid that I shall lose conceit of Lysias, and that
he will appear tame in comparison, even if he be willing to put another
as fine and as long as yours into the field, which I doubt. For quite
lately one of your politicians was abusing him on this very account;
and called him a "speech writer" again and again. So that a feeling
of pride may probably induce him to give up writing speeches.

Soc. What a very amusing notion! But I think, my young man, that you
are much mistaken in your friend if you imagine that he is frightened
at a little noise; and possibly, you think that his assailant was
in earnest? 

Phaedr. I thought, Socrates, that he was. And you are aware that the
greatest and most influential statesmen are ashamed of writing speeches
and leaving them in a written form, lest they should be called Sophists
by posterity. 

Soc. You seem to be unconscious, Phaedrus, that the "sweet elbow"
of the proverb is really the long arm of the Nile. And you appear
to be equally unaware of the fact that this sweet elbow of theirs
is also a long arm. For there is nothing of which our great politicians
are so fond as of writing speeches and bequeathing them to posterity.
And they add their admirers' names at the top of the writing, out
of gratitude to them. 

Phaedr. What do you mean? I do not understand. 

Soc. Why, do you not know that when a politician writes, he begins
with the names of his approvers? 

Phaedr. How so? 

Soc. Why, he begins in this manner: "Be it enacted by the senate,
the people, or both, on the motion of a certain person," who is our
author; and so putting on a serious face, he proceeds to display his
own wisdom to his admirers in what is often a long and tedious composition.
Now what is that sort of thing but a regular piece of authorship?

Phaedr. True. 

Soc. And if the law is finally approved, then the author leaves the
theatre in high delight; but if the law is rejected and he is done
out of his speech-making, and not thought good enough to write, then
he and his party are in mourning. 

Phaedr. Very true. 

Soc. So far are they from despising, or rather so highly do they value
the practice of writing. 

Phaedr. No doubt. 

Soc. And when the king or orator has the power, as Lycurgus or Solon
or Darius had, of attaining an immortality or authorship in a state,
is he not thought by posterity, when they see his compositions, and
does he not think himself, while he is yet alive, to be a god?

Phaedr. Very true. 

Soc. Then do you think that any one of this class, however ill-disposed,
would reproach Lysias with being an author? 

Phaedr. Not upon your view; for according to you he would be casting
a slur upon his own favourite pursuit. 

Soc. Any one may see that there is no disgrace in the mere fact of
writing. 

Phaedr. Certainly not. 

Soc. The disgrace begins when a man writes not well, but badly.

Phaedr. Clearly. 

Soc. And what is well and what is badly-need we ask Lysias, or any
other poet or orator, who ever wrote or will write either a political
or any other work, in metre or out of metre, poet or prose writer,
to teach us this? 

Phaedr. Need we? For what should a man live if not for the pleasures
of discourse? Surely not for the sake of bodily pleasures, which almost
always have previous pain as a condition of them, and therefore are
rightly called slavish. 

Soc. There is time enough. And I believe that the grasshoppers chirruping
after their manner in the heat of the sun over our heads are talking
to one another and looking down at us. What would they say if they
saw that we, like the many, are not conversing, but slumbering at
mid-day, lulled by their voices, too indolent to think? Would they
not have a right to laugh at us? They might imagine that we were slaves,
who, coming to rest at a place of resort of theirs, like sheep lie
asleep at noon around the well. But if they see us discoursing, and
like Odysseus sailing past them, deaf to their siren voices, they
may perhaps, out of respect, give us of the gifts which they receive
from the gods that they may impart them to men. 

Phaedr. What gifts do you mean? I never heard of any. 

Soc. A lover of music like yourself ought surely to have heard the
story of the grasshoppers, who are said to have been human beings
in an age before the Muses. And when the Muses came and song appeared
they were ravished with delight; and singing always, never thought
of eating and drinking, until at last in their forgetfulness they
died. And now they live again in the grasshoppers; and this is the
return which the Muses make to them-they neither hunger, nor thirst,
but from the hour of their birth are always singing, and never eating
or drinking; and when they die they go and inform the Muses in heaven
who honours them on earth. They win the love of Terpsichore for the
dancers by their report of them; of Erato for the lovers, and of the
other Muses for those who do them honour, according to the several
ways of honouring them of Calliope the eldest Muse and of Urania who
is next to her, for the philosophers, of whose music the grasshoppers
make report to them; for these are the Muses who are chiefly concerned
with heaven and thought, divine as well as human, and they have the
sweetest utterance. For many reasons, then, we ought always to talk
and not to sleep at mid-day. 

Phaedr. Let us talk. 

Soc. Shall we discuss the rules of writing and speech as we were proposing?

Phaedr. Very good. 

Soc. In good speaking should not the mind of the speaker know the
truth of the matter about which he is going to speak? 

Phaedr. And yet, Socrates, I have heard that he who would be an orator
has nothing to do with true justice, but only with that which is likely
to be approved by the many who sit in judgment; nor with the truly
good or honourable, but only with opinion about them, and that from
opinion comes persuasion, and not from the truth. 

Soc. The words of the wise are not to be set aside; for there is probably
something in them; and therefore the meaning of this saying is not
hastily to be dismissed. 

Phaedr. Very true. 

Soc. Let us put the matter thus:-Suppose that I persuaded you to buy
a horse and go to the wars. Neither of us knew what a horse was like,
but I knew that you believed a horse to be of tame animals the one
which has the longest ears. 

Phaedr. That would be ridiculous. 

Soc. There is something more ridiculous coming:-Suppose, further,
that in sober earnest I, having persuaded you of this, went and composed
a speech in honour of an ass, whom I entitled a horse beginning: "A
noble animal and a most useful possession, especially in war, and
you may get on his back and fight, and he will carry baggage or anything."

Phaedr. How ridiculous! 

Soc. Ridiculous! Yes; but is not even a ridiculous friend better than
a cunning enemy? 

Phaedr. Certainly. 

Soc. And when the orator instead of putting an ass in the place of
a horse puts good for evil being himself as ignorant of their true
nature as the city on which he imposes is ignorant; and having studied
the notions of the multitude, falsely persuades them not about "the
shadow of an ass," which he confounds with a horse, but about good
which he confounds with evily-what will be the harvest which rhetoric
will be likely to gather after the sowing of that seed? 

Phaedr. The reverse of good. 

Soc. But perhaps rhetoric has been getting too roughly handled by
us, and she might answer: What amazing nonsense you are talking! As
if I forced any man to learn to speak in ignorance of the truth! Whatever
my advice may be worth, I should have told him to arrive at the truth
first, and then come to me. At the same time I boldly assert that
mere knowledge of the truth will not give you the art of persuasion.

Phaedr. There is reason in the lady's defence of herself.

Soc. Quite true; if only the other arguments which remain to be brought
up bear her witness that she is an art at all. But I seem to hear
them arraying themselves on the opposite side, declaring that she
speaks falsely, and that rhetoric is a mere routine and trick, not
an art. Lo! a Spartan appears, and says that there never is nor ever
will be a real art of speaking which is divorced from the truth.

Phaedr. And what are these arguments, Socrates? Bring them out that
we may examine them. 

Soc. Come out, fair children, and convince Phaedrus, who is the father
of similar beauties, that he will never be able to speak about anything
as he ought to speak unless he have a knowledge of philosophy. And
let Phaedrus answer you. 

Phaedr. Put the question. 

Soc. Is not rhetoric, taken generally, a universal art of enchanting
the mind by arguments; which is practised not only in courts and public
assemblies, but in private houses also, having to do with all matters,
great as well as small, good and bad alike, and is in all equally
right, and equally to be esteemed-that is what you have heard?

Phaedr. Nay, not exactly that; I should say rather that I have heard
the art confined to speaking and writing in lawsuits, and to speaking
in public assemblies-not extended farther. 

Soc. Then I suppose that you have only heard of the rhetoric of Nestor
and Odysseus, which they composed in their leisure hours when at Troy,
and never of the rhetoric of Palamedes? 

Phaedr. No more than of Nestor and Odysseus, unless Gorgias is your
Nestor, and Thrasymachus or Theodorus your Odysseus. 

Soc. Perhaps that is my meaning. But let us leave them. And do you
tell me, instead, what are plaintiff and defendant doing in a law
court-are they not contending? 

Phaedr. Exactly so. 

Soc. About the just and unjust-that is the matter in dispute?

Phaedr. Yes. 

Soc. And a professor of the art will make the same thing appear to
the same persons to be at one time just, at another time, if he is
so inclined, to be unjust? 

Phaedr. Exactly. 

Soc. And when he speaks in the assembly, he will make the same things
seem good to the city at one time, and at another time the reverse
of good? 

Phaedr. That is true. 

Soc. Have we not heard of the Eleatic Palamedes (Zeno), who has an
art of speaking by which he makes the same things appear to his hearers
like and unlike, one and many, at rest and in motion? 

Phaedr. Very true. 

Soc. The art of disputation, then, is not confined to the courts and
the assembly, but is one and the same in every use of language; this
is the art, if there be such an art, which is able to find a likeness
of everything to which a likeness can be found, and draws into the
light of day the likenesses and disguises which are used by others?

Phaedr. How do you mean? 

Soc. Let me put the matter thus: When will there be more chance of
deception-when the difference is large or small? 

Phaedr. When the difference is small. 

Soc. And you will be less likely to be discovered in passing by degrees
into the other extreme than when you go all at once? 

Phaedr. Of course. 

Soc. He, then, who would. deceive others, and not be deceived, must
exactly know the real likenesses and differences of things?

Phaedr. He must. 

Soc. And if he is ignorant of the true nature of any subject, how
can he detect the greater or less degree of likeness in other things
to that of which by the hypothesis he is ignorant? 

Phaedr. He cannot. 

Soc. And when men are deceived and their notions are at variance with
realities, it is clear that the error slips in through resemblances?

Phaedr. Yes, that is the way. 

Soc. Then he who would be a master of the art must understand the
real nature of everything; or he will never know either how to make
the gradual departure from truth into the opposite of truth which
is effected by the help of resemblances, or how to avoid it?

Phaedr. He will not. 

Soc. He then, who being ignorant of the truth aims at appearances,
will only attain an art of rhetoric which is ridiculous and is not
an art at all? 

Phaedr. That may be expected. 

Soc. Shall I propose that we look for examples of art and want of
art, according to our notion of them, in the speech of Lysias which
you have in your hand, and in my own speech? 

Phaedr. Nothing could be better; and indeed I think that our previous
argument has been too abstract and-wanting in illustrations.

Soc. Yes; and the two speeches happen to afford a very good example
of the way in which the speaker who knows the truth may, without any
serious purpose, steal away the hearts of his hearers. This piece
of good-fortune I attribute to the local deities; and perhaps, the
prophets of the Muses who are singing over our heads may have imparted
their inspiration to me. For I do not imagine that I have any rhetorical
art of my own. 

Phaedr. Granted; if you will only please to get on. 

Soc. Suppose that you read me the first words of Lysias' speech.

Phaedr. "You know how matters stand with me, and how, as I conceive,
they might be arranged for our common interest; and I maintain that
I ought not to fail in my suit, because I am not your lover. For lovers
repent-" 

Soc. Enough:-Now, shall I point out the rhetorical error of those
words? 

Phaedr. Yes. 

Soc. Every one is aware that about some things we are agreed, whereas
about other things we differ. 

Phaedr. I think that I understand you; but will you explain yourself?

Soc. When any one speaks of iron and silver, is not the same thing
present in the minds of all? 

Phaedr. Certainly. 

Soc. But when any one speaks of justice and goodness we part company
and are at odds with one another and with ourselves? 

Phaedr. Precisely. 

Soc. Then in some things we agree, but not in others? 

Phaedr. That is true. 

Soc. In which are we more likely to be deceived, and in which has
rhetoric the greater power? 

Phaedr. Clearly, in the uncertain class. 

Soc. Then the rhetorician ought to make a regular division, and acquire
a distinct notion of both classes, as well of that in which the many
err, as of that in which they do not err? 

Phaedr. He who made such a distinction would have an excellent principle.

Soc. Yes; and in the next place he must have a keen eye for the observation
of particulars in speaking, and not make a mistake about the class
to which they are to be referred. 

Phaedr. Certainly. 

Soc. Now to which class does love belong-to the debatable or to the
undisputed class? 

Phaedr. To the debatable, clearly; for if not, do you think that love
would have allowed you to say as you did, that he is an evil both
to the lover and the beloved, and also the greatest possible good?

Soc. Capital. But will you tell me whether I defined love at the beginning
of my speech? for, having been in an ecstasy, I cannot well remember.

Phaedr. Yes, indeed; that you did, and no mistake. 

Soc. Then I perceive that the Nymphs of Achelous and Pan the son of
Hermes, who inspired me, were far better rhetoricians than Lysias
the son of Cephalus. Alas! how inferior to them he is! But perhaps
I am mistaken; and Lysias at the commencement of his lover's speech
did insist on our supposing love to be something or other which he
fancied him to be, and according to this model he fashioned and framed
the remainder of his discourse. Suppose we read his beginning over
again: 

Phaedr. If you please; but you will not find what you want.

Soc, Read, that I may have his exact words. 
Phaedr. "You know how matters stand with and how, as I conceive, they
might be arranged for our common interest; and I maintain I ought
not to fail in my suit because I am not your lover, for lovers repent
of the kindnesses which they have shown, when their love is over."

Soc. Here he appears to have done just the reverse of what he ought;
for he has begun at the end, and is swimming on his back through the
flood to the place of starting. His address to the fair youth begins
where the lover would have ended. Am I not right, sweet Phaedrus?

Phaedr. Yes, indeed, Socrates; he does begin at the end.

Soc. Then as to the other topics-are they not thrown down anyhow?
Is there any principle in them? Why should the next topic follow next
in order, or any other topic? I cannot help fancying in my ignorance
that he wrote off boldly just what came into his head, but I dare
say that you would recognize a rhetorical necessity in the succession
of the several parts of the composition? 

Phaedr. You have too good an opinion of me if you think that I have
any such insight into his principles of composition. 

Soc. At any rate, you will allow that every discourse ought to be
a living creature, having a body of its own and a head and feet; there
should be a middle, beginning, and end, adapted to one another and
to the whole? 

Phaedr. Certainly. 

Soc. Can this be said of the discourse of Lysias? See whether you
can find any more connexion in his words than in the epitaph which
is said by some to have been inscribed on the grave of Midas the Phrygian.

Phaedr. What is there remarkable in the epitaph? 

Soc. It is as follows:- 

I am a maiden of bronze and lie on the tomb of Midas; 
So long as water flows and tall trees grow, 
So long here on this spot by his sad tomb abiding, 
I shall declare to passers-by that Midas sleeps below. Now in this
rhyme whether a line comes first or comes last, as you will perceive,
makes no difference. 

Phaedr. You are making fun of that oration of ours. 

Soc. Well, I will say no more about your friend's speech lest I should
give offence to you; although I think that it might furnish many other
examples of what a man ought rather to avoid. But I will proceed to
the other speech, which, as I think, is also suggestive to students
of rhetoric. 

Phaedr. In what way? 

Soc. The two speeches, as you may remember, were unlike-I the one
argued that the lover and the other that the non-lover ought to be
accepted. 

Phaedr. And right manfully. 

Soc. You should rather say "madly"; and madness was the argument of
them, for, as I said, "love is a madness." 

Phaedr. Yes. 

Soc. And of madness there were two kinds; one produced by human infirmity,
the other was a divine release of the soul from the yoke of custom
and convention. 

Phaedr. True. 

Soc. The divine madness was subdivided into four kinds, prophetic,
initiatory, poetic, erotic, having four gods presiding over them;
the first was the inspiration of Apollo, the second that of Dionysus,
the third that of the Muses, the fourth that of Aphrodite and Eros.
In the description of the last kind of madness, which was also said
to be the best, we spoke of the affection of love in a figure, into
which we introduced a tolerably credible and possibly true though
partly erring myth, which was also a hymn in honour of Love, who is
your lord and also mine, Phaedrus, and the guardian of fair children,
and to him we sung the hymn in measured and solemn strain.

Phaedr. I know that I had great pleasure in listening to you.

Soc. Let us take this instance and note how the transition was made
from blame to praise. 

Phaedr. What do you mean? 

Soc. I mean to say that the composition was mostly playful. Yet in
these chance fancies of the hour were involved two principles of which
we should be too glad to have a clearer description if art could give
us one. 

Phaedr. What are they? 

Soc. First, the comprehension of scattered particulars in one idea;
as in our definition of love, which whether true or false certainly
gave clearness and consistency to the discourse, the speaker should
define his several notions and so make his meaning clear.

Phaedr. What is the other principle, Socrates? 

Soc. The second principle is that of division into species according
to the natural formation, where the joint is, not breaking any part
as a bad carver might. Just as our two discourses, alike assumed,
first of all, a single form of unreason; and then, as the body which
from being one becomes double and may be divided into a left side
and right side, each having parts right and left of the same name-after
this manner the speaker proceeded to divide the parts of the left
side and did not desist until he found in them an evil or left-handed
love which he justly reviled; and the other discourse leading us to
the madness which lay on the right side, found another love, also
having the same name, but divine, which the speaker held up before
us and applauded and affirmed to be the author of the greatest benefits.

Phaedr. Most true. 

Soc. I am myself a great lover of these processes of division and
generalization; they help me to speak and to think. And if I find
any man who is able to see "a One and Many" in nature, him I follow,
and "walk in his footsteps as if he were a god." And those who have
this art, I have hitherto been in the habit of calling dialecticians;
but God knows whether the name is right or not. And I should like
to know what name you would give to your or to Lysias' disciples,
and whether this may not be that famous art of rhetoric which Thrasymachus
and others teach and practise? Skilful speakers they are, and impart
their skill to any who is willing to make kings of them and to bring
gifts to them. 

Phaedr. Yes, they are royal men; but their art is not the same with
the art of those whom you call, and rightly, in my opinion, dialecticians:-Still
we are in the dark about rhetoric. 

Soc. What do you mean? The remains of it, if there be anything remaining
which can be brought under rules of art, must be a fine thing; and,
at any rate, is not to be despised by you and me. But how much is
left? 

Phaedr. There is a great deal surely to be found in books of rhetoric?

Soc. Yes; thank you for reminding me:-There is the exordium, showing
how the speech should begin, if I remember rightly; that is what you
mean-the niceties of the art? 

Phaedr. Yes. 

Soc. Then follows the statement of facts, and upon that witnesses;
thirdly, proofs; fourthly, probabilities are to come; the great Byzantian
word-maker also speaks, if I am not mistaken, of confirmation and
further confirmation. 

Phaedr. You mean the excellent Theodorus. 

Soc. Yes; and he tells how refutation or further refutation is to
be managed, whether in accusation or defence. I ought also to mention
the illustrious Parian, Evenus, who first invented insinuations and
indirect praises; and also indirect censures, which according to some
he put into verse to help the memory. But shall I "to dumb forgetfulness
consign" Tisias and Gorgias, who are not ignorant that probability
is superior to truth, and who by: force of argument make the little
appear great and the great little, disguise the new in old fashions
and the old in new fashions, and have discovered forms for everything,
either short or going on to infinity. I remember Prodicus laughing
when I told him of this; he said that he had himself discovered the
true rule of art, which was to be neither long nor short, but of a
convenient length. 

Phaedr. Well done, Prodicus! 

Soc. Then there is Hippias the Elean stranger, who probably agrees
with him. 

Phaedr. Yes. 

Soc. And there is also Polus, who has treasuries of diplasiology,
and gnomology, and eikonology, and who teaches in them the names of
which Licymnius made him a present; they were to give a polish.

Phaedr. Had not Protagoras something of the same sort? 

Soc. Yes, rules of correct diction and many other fine precepts; for
the "sorrows of a poor old man," or any other pathetic case, no one
is better than the Chalcedonian giant; he can put a whole company
of people into a passion and out of one again by his mighty magic,
and is first-rate at inventing or disposing of any sort of calumny
on any grounds or none. All of them agree in asserting that a speech
should end in a recapitulation, though they do not all agree to use
the same word. 

Phaedr. You mean that there should be a summing up of the arguments
in order to remind the hearers of them. 

Soc. I have now said all that I have to say of the art of rhetoric:
have you anything to add? 

Phaedr. Not much; nothing very important. 

Soc. Leave the unimportant and let us bring the really important question
into the light of day, which is: What power has this art of rhetoric,
and when? 

Phaedr. A very great power in public meetings. 

Soc. It has. But I should like to know whether you have the same feeling
as I have about the rhetoricians? To me there seem to be a great many
holes in their web. 

Phaedr. Give an example. 

Soc. I will. Suppose a person to come to your friend Eryximachus,
or to his father Acumenus, and to say to him: "I know how to apply
drugs which shall have either a heating or a cooling effect, and I
can give a vomit and also a purge, and all that sort of thing; and
knowing all this, as I do, I claim to be a physician and to make physicians
by imparting this knowledge to others,"-what do you suppose that they
would say? 

Phaedr. They would be sure to ask him whether he knew "to whom" he
would give his medicines, and "when," and "how much." 

Soc. And suppose that he were to reply: "No; I know nothing of all
that; I expect the patient who consults me to be able to do these
things for himself"? 

Phaedr. They would say in reply that he is a madman or pedant who
fancies that he is a physician because he has read something in a
book, or has stumbled on a prescription or two, although he has no
real understanding of the art of medicine. 

Soc. And suppose a person were to come to Sophocles or Euripides and
say that he knows how to make a very long speech about a small matter,
and a short speech about a great matter, and also a sorrowful speech,
or a terrible, or threatening speech, or any other kind of speech,
and in teaching this fancies that he is teaching the art of tragedy-?

Phaedr. They too would surely laugh at him if he fancies that tragedy
is anything but the arranging of these elements in a manner which
will be suitable to one another and to the whole. 

Soc. But I do not suppose that they would be rude or abusive to him:
Would they not treat him as a musician would a man who thinks that
he is a harmonist because he knows how to pitch the highest and lowest
notes; happening to meet such an one he would not say to him savagely,
"Fool, you are mad!" But like a musician, in a gentle and harmonious
tone of voice, he would answer: "My good friend, he who would be a
harmonist must certainly know this, and yet he may understand nothing
of harmony if he has not got beyond your stage of knowledge, for you
only know the preliminaries of harmony and not harmony itself."

Phaedr. Very true. 

Soc. And will not Sophocles say to the display of the would-be tragedian,
that this is not tragedy but the preliminaries of tragedy? and will
not Acumenus say the same of medicine to the would-be physician?

Phaedr. Quite true. 

Soc. And if Adrastus the mellifluous or Pericles heard of these wonderful
arts, brachylogies and eikonologies and all the hard names which we
have been endeavouring to draw into the light of day, what would they
say? Instead of losing temper and applying uncomplimentary epithets,
as you and I have been doing, to the authors of such an imaginary
art, their superior wisdom would rather censure us, as well as them.
"Have a little patience, Phaedrus and Socrates, they would say; you
should not be in such a passion with those who from some want of dialectical
skill are unable to define the nature of rhetoric, and consequently
suppose that they have found the art in the preliminary conditions
of it, and when these have been taught by them to others, fancy that
the whole art of rhetoric has been taught by them; but as to using
the several instruments of the art effectively, or making the composition
a whole,-an application of it such as this is they regard as an easy
thing which their disciples may make for themselves." 

Phaedr. I quite admit, Socrates, that the art of rhetoric which these
men teach and of which they write is such as you describe-there I
agree with you. But I still want to know where and how the true art
of rhetoric and persuasion is to be acquired. 

Soc. The perfection which is required of the finished orator is, or
rather must be, like the perfection of anything else; partly given
by nature, but may also be assisted by art. If you have the natural
power and add to it knowledge and practice, you will be a distinguished
speaker; if you fall short in either of these, you will be to that
extent defective. But the art, as far as there is an art, of rhetoric
does not lie in the direction of Lysias or Thrasymachus.

Phaedr. In what direction then? 

Soc. I conceive Pericles to have been the most accomplished of rhetoricians.

Phaedr. What of that? 

Soc. All the great arts require discussion and high speculation about
the truths of nature; hence come loftiness of thought and completeness
of execution. And this, as I conceive, was the quality which, in addition
to his natural gifts, Pericles acquired from his intercourse with
Anaxagoras whom he happened to know. He was thus imbued with the higher
philosophy, and attained the knowledge of Mind and the negative of
Mind, which were favourite themes of Anaxagoras, and applied what
suited his purpose to the art of speaking. 

Phaedr. Explain. 

Soc. Rhetoric is like medicine. 

Phaedr. How so? 

Soc. Why, because medicine has to define the nature of the body and
rhetoric of the soul-if we would proceed, not empirically but scientifically,
in the one case to impart health and strength by giving medicine and
food in the other to implant the conviction or virtue which you desire,
by the right application of words and training. 

Phaedr. There, Socrates, I suspect that you are right. 

Soc. And do you think that you can know the nature of the soul intelligently
without knowing the nature of the whole? 

Phaedr. Hippocrates the Asclepiad says that the nature even of the
body can only </pre></body></html>
